<activity>
Activity 1.2
n Take lead nitrate solution in a test tube.
n Add potassium iodide solution to this.
n What do you observe?
</activity>

Figure 1.2
Formation of hydrogen gas by the action of dilute sulphuric acid on zinc

You must have observed that magnesium ribbon burns with a dazzling white flame and changes into a white powder. This powder is magnesium oxide. It is formed due to the reaction between magnesium and oxygen present in the air.

<activity>
Activity 1.3
n Take a few zinc granules in a conical flask or a test tube.
n Add dilute hydrochloric acid or sulphuric acid to this (Fig. 1.2).
CAUTION: Handle the acid with care.
n Do you observe anything happening around the zinc granules?
n Touch the conical flask or test tube. Is there any change in its temperature?
</activity>

From the above three activities, we can say that any of the following observations helps us to determine whether a chemical reaction has taken place –
n change in state
n change in colour
n evolution of a gas
n change in temperature.

As we observe the changes around us, we can see that there is a large variety of chemical reactions taking place around us. We will study about the various types of chemical reactions and their symbolic representation in this Chapter.

1.1 CHEMICAL EQUATIONS

Activity 1.1 can be described as – when a magnesium ribbon is burnt in oxygen, it gets converted to magnesium oxide. This description of a chemical reaction in a sentence form is quite long. It can be written in a shorter form. The simplest way to do this is to write it in the form of a word-equation.

The word-equation for the above reaction would be –
Magnesium + Oxygen → Magnesium oxide
            (Reactants)   (Product)
(1.1)

The substances that undergo chemical change in the reaction (1.1), magnesium and oxygen, are the reactants. The new substance is magnesium oxide, formed during the reaction, as a product.

A word-equation shows change of reactants to products through an arrow placed between them. The reactants are written on the left-hand side (LHS) with a plus sign (+) between them. Similarly, products are written on the right-hand side (RHS) with a plus sign (+) between them. The arrowhead points towards the products, and shows the direction of the reaction.