1.2.2  Decomposition  Reaction

<activity>
Activity  1.5

  Take about 2 g ferrous sulphate crystals
in a dry boiling tube.
  Note  the  colour  of  the  ferrous  sulphate
crystals.
  Heat  the  boiling  tube  over  the    flame    of
a  burner  or  spirit  lamp  as  shown  in
Fig. 1.4.
  Observe  the  colour  of  the  crystals  after
heating.

Have you noticed that the green colour of the ferrous sulphate crystals
has changed? You can also smell the characteristic odour of burning
sulphur.

2FeSO4(s) --(Heat)--> Fe2O3(s)  +  SO2(g)  + SO3(g)
(Ferrous sulphate)     (Ferric oxide)
(1.19)

Figure 1.4
Correct way of heating
the boiling tube
containing crystals
of ferrous sulphate
and of smelling the
odour

In this reaction you can observe that a single reactant breaks down
to  give  simpler  products.  This  is  a  decomposition  reaction.  Ferrous
sulphate crystals (FeSO4. 7H2O) lose water when heated and the colour
of  the  crystals  changes.  It  then  decomposes  to  ferric  oxide  (Fe2O3),
sulphur dioxide (SO2) and sulphur trioxide (SO3). Ferric oxide is a solid,
while SO2 and SO3 are gases.
</activity>

Decomposition of calcium carbonate to calcium oxide and carbon
dioxide  on  heating  is  an  important  decomposition  reaction  used  in
various industries. Calcium oxide is called lime or quick lime. It has
many uses – one is in the manufacture of cement. When a decomposition
reaction is carried out by heating, it is called thermal decomposition.

CaCO3(s) --(Heat)--> CaO(s)    +   CO2(g)
(Limestone)           (Quick lime)
(1.20)

Another example of a thermal decomposition reaction is given
in Activity 1.6.

<activity>
Activity  1.6

  Take about 2 g lead nitrate powder in a boiling
tube.
  Hold the boiling tube with a pair of tongs and
heat it over a flame, as shown in Fig. 1.5.
  What do you observe? Note down the change,
if  any.

Figure 1.5
Heating of lead nitrate and
emission of nitrogen dioxide

You will observe the emission of brown fumes.
These  fumes  are  of  nitrogen  dioxide  (NO2).  The
reaction that takes place is –